---
layout: post
permalink: /2021books/
published: true
title: 2021 books
tags: [logs]
aside:
  toc: true
mathjax: true
---

## **Academic**

1. Richard Borcherds’ lecture series: Galois theory
2. Richard Borcherds’ lecture series: algebraic geometry
3. Richard Borcherds’ lecture series: introduction to homological algebra
4. Topics in cohomology of groups, Chapter VI, Spectral sequences (Serge Lang)
5. Examples of spectral sequences (Man Cheung & Yao-Rui) alert!: contains errors in the Heisenberg group example.
6. Linear algebraic groups and finite groups of Lie type (Gunter Malle & Donna Testerman)
7. Simple groups of Lie type (Roger W. Carter)
8. Introduction to algebraic geometry (Brendan Hassett)
9. Linear algebraic groups (James E. Humphreys)
10. Character theory of finite groups of Lie type (Lecture series by Meinolf Geck)
11. Representation theory of reductive algebraic groups-techniques and applications (Lecture series by Donna Testerman)

---

## **Nonacademic**

1. The midnight library (Matt Haig)
2. Trees, leaves, flowers & seeds (Sarah Jose)
3. 你的夏天還好嗎（金愛爛）
4. Brief answers to big questions (Stephen Hawking)
5. 消失的13級台階（高野和明）
6. The push (Ashley Audrain)
7. Because they wanted to (Mary Gaitskill)
8. My name is Lucy Barton (Elizabeth Strout)
9. The bell jar (Sylvia Plath)
10. Exhalation (Ted Chiang)
11. My sister, the serial killer (Oyinkan Braithwaite)
12. The street of crocodiles (Bruno Schulz)
13. 編舟記（三浦紫苑）
14. Klara and the Sun（Kazuo Ishiguro 石黑一雄）
15. Penpal (Dathan Auerbach)
16. Troubling love (Elena Ferrante)
17. 赤地之戀（張愛玲）
18. X+Y: a mathematician's manifesto of rethinking gender (Eugenia Cheng)
19. 秧歌（張愛玲）
20. It sounded better in my head (Nina Kenwood)
21. 反叛者（馬洛伊·山多爾）
22. The ice palace (Tarjei Vesaas)
23. Where the crawdads sing (Delia Owens)
24. Agatha (Anne Cathrine Bowmann)
25. Eggshell Skull (Bri Lee)
26. 克林索爾的最後夏天（黑塞）
27. 小行星掉在下午（沈大成）
28. 草莓、極光與火燄（西加奈子）
29. 鱷魚手記（邱妙津）
30. Beautiful world, where are you (Sally Rooney)
31. Prima Facie (Suzie Miller)
