# notes on subgroups and intersections

It is well known that there are 7 (conjugacy) classes of maximal subgroups in the finite exceptional group $G_2(5)$, for example, they are listed in Table 8.14 of the 2013 book *The maximal subgroups of the low-dimensional finite classical groups by* Bray, Holt & Roney-Dougal.

We are interested in the intersections of the such maximal subgroups, which essentially are intersections of double cosets, for which studying $G_2$-actions on cosets is much relevant. The 1988 paper by Lawther and Saxl as well as Lawther’s 1989 paper provide useful insights on this topic.

A good starting point is to look at the maximal subgroups of type $A_2.2$. These groups are normalisers of the subsystem subgroups of type $A_2$ roots, which can be constructed using the Borel—Siebenthal algorithm. Typically, we have the extended Dynkin diagram consisting of the roots $\alpha, \beta$, and $3\alpha + 2\beta$, and then removing the root $\alpha$ yields an $A_2$ diagram. In Magma this can be easily constructed using the SubsystemSubgroup function; for example:

G := GroupOfLieType(”G2”, 5);

A2:= SubsystemSubgroup(G,{2, 12});

In particular, this subsystem subgroup is isomorphic to $\mathrm{PSL}_3(5)$, with roots $\pm\beta$, $\pm(3\alpha + \beta)$, $\pm(3\alpha + 2\beta)$.

Let $H \cong \mathrm{PSL}_3(5)$ be the subgroup constructed above, Correspondingly, we can find the maximal subgroup of type $A_2.2$ containing $H$ as its normaliser $N_G(N) \cong \mathrm{PSL}_3(5).2$. However, it is hard to directlt execute this in Magma for larger groups such as $G_2(7)$, since the Normaliser function becomes rather inefficient. We discuss alternative methods later.

Now we can try to compute some possible intersections $N \cap N^g, H \cap H^g$, for some elements $g \in G$. In the special case where $g = x_\alpha(t)$ with $t \in \mathrm{GF}(5))$ is nonzero), which centralises elements $x_{3\alpha+2\beta}(s) \in N, s \in \mathrm{GF}(5)$, we see that


$$
N \cap N^g = H \cap H^g \cong C_5 \rtimes D_5.A_5.
$$

Since $x_{-\alpha}(t)$ centralises $x_{-3\alpha + 2\beta}(s)$ for all $s, t \in \mathrm{GF}(5)$, the calculation is similar when $g = x_{-\alpha}(t)$ for all nonzero $t$ (when $t = 0, x_r(t)$ is the identity element, and so $N \cap N^g = N, H \cap H^g = H$ for any $g = x_r(0)$, where $r$ is a root).

A routine calculation using the commutator formula tells us that same is true for all $g = x_r(t)$ for $r \in \{\pm(\alpha + \beta), \pm(2\alpha + \beta)\}.$

Calculating in Magma we see that when

$$
\begin{align} g = x_{\alpha + \beta}(t)x_{2\alpha + \beta}(s), &\  s, t \neq 0, &  N \cap N^g \cong 5^2 \rtimes {10}, &\ H \cap H^g \cong \mathrm{He}(5);\\ g = x_{\alpha + \beta}(t)x_{-\alpha - \beta}(s), &\  s + t \equiv \pm2 \bmod 5, & N \cap N^g \cong Q_8 .A_5, &\ H \cap H^g \cong \mathrm{SL}_2(5);\\g = x_{\alpha + \beta}(t)x_{-\alpha - \beta}(s), &\  s + t \equiv \pm1 \bmod 5, & N \cap N^g \cong \mathrm{SL}_2(5).2, &\ H \cap H^g \cong \mathrm{SL}_2(5);\\g = x_{\alpha + \beta}(t)x_{-\alpha - \beta}(s), &\  s = t, & N \cap N^g \cong 5 \rtimes D_5.A_5, &\ H \cap H^g \cong 5 \rtimes D_5.A_5. \end{align}
$$

Note that here *novel maximal subgroups* (or, *novelties*) of $N \cong A_2.2$ are detected.


Back to the construction of $A_2.2 \le G_2$, we note that $W(G_2(q)) \cong W(G_2)$ and the Weyl group $W$ of $G$ is cotained in an $A_2.2$-type subgroup of $G$, which is not contained in any $A_2$-type subgroup. Thus we could generated an $A_2.2$ as $\langle H, W\rangle$. For this, we want to find the representatives of $W \cong N_G(T)/T$.
Note that the normaliser $N = N_G(T)=\langle n_\alpha(t)|\alpha \in \Phi, t \in \mathrm{GF}(p)^\times\rangle$, where $\Phi$ is the root system of $G$ with respect to the maximal torus $T$.
The *extended Weyl group* $V=\langle n_\alpha(1)|\alpha \in \Phi\rangle$ of $G$ satisfies that $N = \langle V, T \rangle$ and the name comes from the fact that $V/V \cap T \cong W$. In particular, $V \cong W.(V \cap T)$, where $V \cap T$ is isomorphic to an elementary abelian group of order $\ell^{\mathrm{rk}|(G)|}$, with $\ell = \gcd(2, p-1)$. In Magma, the Normaliser function is inefficient for large matrix group like this, so we try to construct *extended Weyl group* $V$ of $G$; see also [Notation 2.1] in Späth’s 2010 paper *Sylow $d$-tori of classical groups and the McKay conjecture, I*.


(**Novel maximal subgroups:** Let $G$ be an almost simple group, and $M$ a maximal subgroup of $G$, if $S \cap M$ is not maximal in $S \le G$, then $M$ is a novel maximal subgroup of $G$.)

**How do we know these are all of the possible intersections up to isomorphism/conjugacy?**

Since all subgroups of type $A_2.2$ are conjugate in $G \cong G_2(q)$, by the orbit-stabiliser theorem, we know that the number of conjugacy classes of subgroups of type $A_2.2$ in $G$ is $[G : N_G(N)]$, where $N$ is the subgroup of type $A_2.2$ constructed above. Since $N$ is self-normalising, it follows that there are precisely $[G : N]$ conjugacy classes of subgroups of type $A_2.2$.


## Useful general results
For us to recognise some subgroups of $G_2(q)$, it is useful to know some special numbers coming from subgroup orders. First of all, the order of $G_2(q)$ is $q^6(q^6-1)(q^2-1)$, and a subgroup of type $A_2(q).2$ has index $\frac{1}{2}(q^6 + q^3)$ in $G_2(q)$, as $A_2(q)$ has order $q^3(q^3-1)(q^2-1)$.

We know that there are 6 conjugacy classes of maximal tori corresponding to the 6 conjugacy classes $\{[1], [-1], [r_{\frac{\pi}{3}}], [r_{\frac{2\pi}{3}}], [s_{\alpha}], [s_{\beta}]\}$ of the Weyl group $W \cong \mathrm{Dih}_6$.

Up to isomorphism, these finite maximal tori are $C_{q - 1}^2, C_{q + 1}^2, C_{q^2 - q + 1}, C_{q^2 + q + 1}, C_{q^2 - 1}, C_{q^2 - 1}$, respectively.
